---
slug: dev-blog-1
title: "Dev Blog #1"
authors: [tbrennan]
tags: [devblog]
---

Hello everybody. Two things from me today.

### 1. Rebranding the Project

As you may have noticed, the project has been going through some rebranding over the last few days.

Due to an error on my part, I lost the domain name SimpleIcelandic.com. As a result, I will no longer be using the name Simple Icelandic for my Icelandic language work. While I really liked the name, I am not willing to pay the company that bought it when my coverage expired, and it does not make sense to use a name that you do not own the domain rights to.

As a result, the project will be called **Icelandic Now**.

<!-- truncate -->

In the coming days, I will be connecting the domain name IcelandicNow.com to the blog and course, as well as rebranding this website and any of my previous works.

I want to apologize for any confusion now or in the future over the project's name. Losing the domain was a mistake I made and a harsh lesson learned.

### 2. Updating Icelandic for Beginners

With the publication of my first course, Icelandic for Beginners, many suggestions, comments, and other things of that nature have come in.

I will be looking to implement those suggestions and fix all errors that people report as soon as possible.

Most of the suggestions have revolved around making the content more engaging. Many have said that the course feels too much like a textbook and less like a course. Following those complaints, I have started to lengthen the quizzes after the modules, as well as add captioned pictures throughout. Be on the lookout for those!

Please continue to report any errors and message me with any suggestions. Thank you to everyone who has browsed or purchased the course thus far.

Best,

Tbrennan
